# BIOMD0000000012: BIOMD0000000012

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000012.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000012.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


Elowitz2000 - Repressilator

This model describes the deterministic version of the repressilator system.

The authors of this model (see reference) use three transcriptional repressor
systems that are not part of any natural biological clock to build an
oscillating network that they called the repressilator. The model system was
induced in Escherichia coli.

In this system, LacI (variable X is the mRNA, variable PX is the protein)
inhibits the tetracycline-resistance transposon tetR (Y, PY describe mRNA and
protein). Protein tetR inhibits the gene Cl from phage Lambda (Z, PZ: mRNA,
protein),and protein Cl inhibits lacI expression. With the appropriate
parameter values this system oscillates.

This model is described in the article:

[A synthetic oscillatory network of transcriptional
regulators.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/10659856)

Elowitz MB, Leibler S.

Nature. 2000 Jan; 403(6767):335-338

Abstract:

Networks of interacting biomolecules carry out many essential functions in
living cells, but the 'design principles' underlying the functioning of such
intracellular networks remain poorly understood, despite intensive efforts
including quantitative analysis of relatively simple systems. Here we present
a complementary approach to this problem: the design and construction of a
synthetic network to implement a particular function. We used three
transcriptional repressor systems that are not part of any natural biological
clock to build an oscillating network, termed the repressilator, in
Escherichia coli. The network periodically induces the synthesis of green
fluorescent protein as a readout of its state in individual cells. The
resulting oscillations, with typical periods of hours, are slower than the
cell-division cycle, so the state of the oscillator has to be transmitted from
generation to generation. This artificial clock displays noisy behaviour,
possibly because of stochastic fluctuations of its components. Such 'rational
network design may lead both to the engineering of new cellular behaviours and
to an improved understanding of naturally occurring networks.

The model is based upon the equations in Box 1 of the paper; however, these
equations as printed are dimensionless, and the correct dimensions have been
returned to the equations, and the parameters set to reproduce Figure 1C
(left).

The original model was generated by B.E. Shapiro using Cellerator version 1.0
update 2.1127 using Mathematica 4.2 for Mac OS X (June 4, 2002), November 27,
2002 12:15:32, using (PowerMac,PowerPC, Mac OS X,MacOSX,Darwin).

Nicolas Le Novere provided a corrected version generated by SBMLeditor on Sun
Aug 20 00:44:05 BST 2006. This removed the EmptySet species. Ran fine on
COPASI 4.0 build 18.

Bruce Shapiro revised the model with SBMLeditor on 23 October 2006 20:39 PST.
This defines default units and correct reactions. The original Cellerator
reactions while being mathematically correct did not accurately reflect the
intent of the authors. The original notes were mostly removed because they
were mostly incorrect in the revised version. Tested with MathSBML 2.6.0.

Nicolas Le Novere changed the volume to 1 cubic micrometre, to allow for
stochastic simulation.

Changed by Lukas Endler to use the average livetime of mRNA instead of its
halflife and a corrected value of alpha and alpha0.

Moreover, the equations used in this model were clarified, cf. below.

The equations given in **box 1** of the original publication are rescaled in
three respects (lowercase letters denote the rescaled, uppercase letters the
unscaled number of molecules per cell):

  * the time is rescaled to the average mRNA lifetime, _t_ave: τ = t/t_ave_
  * the mRNA concentration is rescaled to the translation efficiency _eff: m = M/eff_
  * the protein concentration is rescaled to _Km: p = P/Km_

_α_ in the equations should be in units of rescaled proteins per promotor and
cell, and _β_ is the ratio of the protein to the mRNA decay rates or the ratio
of the mRNA to the protein halflife.

In this version of the model _α_ and _β_ are calculated correspondingly to the
article, while _p_ and _m_ where just replaced by _P/Km_ resp. _M/eff_ and all
equations multiplied by _1/t_ave_ . Also, to make the equations easier to
read, commonly used variables derived from the parameters given in the article
by simple rules were introduced.

The parameters given in the article were:

promotor strength (repressed) ( _tps_repr_ ):  | 5*10 -4 |
transcripts/(promotor*s)  
---|---|---  
promotor strength (full) ( _tps_active_ ): | 0.5| transcripts/(promotor*s)  
mRNA half life, τ 1/2,mRNA : | 2| min  
protein half life, τ 1/2,prot : | 10| min  
K M : | 40| monomers/cell  
Hill coefficient n: | 2 |  
  
From these the following constants can be derived:

average mRNA lifetime ( _t_ave_ ):  |  _τ 1/2,mRNA /ln(2) _ | = 2.89 min  
---|---|---  
mRNA decay rate ( _kd_mRNA_ ): |  _ln(2)/ τ 1/2,mRNA _ | = 0.347 min -1  
protein decay rate ( _kd_prot_ ): |  _ln(2)/ τ 1/2,prot _  
transcription rate ( _a_tr_ ): |  _tps_active*60_ | = 29.97 transcripts/min  
transcription rate (repressed) ( _a0_tr_ ): |  _tps_repr*60_ | = 0.03
transcripts/min  
translation rate ( _k_tl_ ): |  _eff*kd_mRNA_ | = 6.93 proteins/(mRNA*min)  
α : |  _a_tr*eff*τ 1/2,prot /(ln(2)*K M ) _ | = 216.4
proteins/(promotor*cell*Km)  
α 0 : |  _a0_tr*eff*τ 1/2,prot /(ln(2)*K M ) _ | = 0.2164
proteins/(promotor*cell*Km)  
β : |  _k_dp/k_dm_ | = 0.2  
  

Annotation by the Kinetic Simulation Algorithm Ontology (KiSAO):

To reproduce the simulations run published by the authors, the model has to be
simulated with any of two different approaches. First, one could use a
deterministic method (
[KISAO_0000035](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.kisao/KISAO_0000035) ) with
continuous variables (
[KISAO_0000018](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.kisao/KISAO_0000018) ). One
sample algorithm to use is the CVODE solver (
[KISAO_0000019](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.kisao/KISAO_0000019) ).
Second, one could simulate the system using Gillespie's direct method (
[KISAO_0000029](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.kisao/KISAO_0000029) ), which
is a stochastic method (
[KISAO_0000036](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.kisao/KISAO_0000036) )
supporting adaptive timesteps (
[KISAO_0000041](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.kisao/KISAO_0000041) ) and
using discrete variables (
[KISAO_0000016](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.kisao/KISAO_0000016) ).

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000012](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000012) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.


